Cooperative development of a work community
The iceberg model can be used for managing change according to, for
instance, the model shown in Diagram 2. Through genuine encounters
and mutually respectful dialogue (interaction in discussion, genuine
listening and critical reflection), the participants are able to create
different models for solution (divergence stage). After this, they agree on
the development issues and the means that they will use to achieve these
goals (convergence stage). Usually this kind of brainstorming process
will produce a large number of possibilities, many of which will be
feasible. The most common mistake is to start too many development
processes at the same time. Therefore good leadership needs to have an
ability to set priorities together with all the parties involved. Hargreaves
et al. (1989) describe the stages of a good development process in their
model (see also Hämäläinen et al. 1993, and Kohonen & Leppilampi
1994).
In Diagram 2 the model is presented in relation to experiential
learning (in the circle in the middle of the diagram; Kolb 1984).
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

11
A development process should start, according to the theory of
experiential learning, with a thorough reflection of where one is and
where one should get, based on each employee’s own experiences and
expectations. In this divergence stage, different cooperative techniques
(meetings to map out problems, questionnaire, open discussion, guided
cooperative process, etc.) are used to define the situation of the
community or group at the moment. During the process, the community’s
strengths and development issues are examined in relation to the
approved strategy. Reflection can also be targeted at daily practices,
agreed rules, flow of communication, the relationship of everyday values
to official values, mapping of learning, etc. The most important thing is
that the staff feel that a successful process could lead to improved work
conditions, well-being and motivation, and staff relationships.
After the review of the current situation, the evaluation proceeds to
the convergence stage, whereby the issues to be developed are agreed
upon, as well as their order of priority (the staff develop a theory/model
of their own about how to proceed). What makes the model so useful is
that, for example, a one-year plan can be drawn up for the organization
using the model. It is important to agree a schedule for each target of
development, i.e., when it is estimated to be at a stage in which the
organization can move on to the next development issue.
As part of the plan, each target of development is assigned to a
number of responsible members, including a definition of the criteria for
success (i.e. how to verify that the process really proceeds and the goal is
reached), and an appropriate follow-up procedure. In cooperative
leadership, everyone chooses their participation in a project out of the 4-5
most important mutually agreed tasks at the beginning of the
development process. The main thing is that everyone is a member in at
least one development group.
In the course of the process, the project implementation (the testing
stage for experiential learning) and assessment (reflection) go hand in
hand at all times. In practise this means evaluations in the middle of the
process, and reporting to all active members. Continuous evaluation is an
especially important instrument of cooperative leadership, involving an
attempt at a suitable balance between “pressure” and support. Support is
particularly needed when the process is about to wither or when the skill
and resources are about to run out. A leader can never leave the staff on
their own, instead she always has to know where the community is going.
Defining the criteria for success in the beginning of each project
and continuously redefining them as necessary will ensure that the
process continues and that the staff remain motivated. Without
documented, broad, concrete goals, the beginning situation is often
forgotten. As a result, it is easy to feel that no progress was made. To
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

12
keep up persistence and an increasingly efficient process for the next
target of development, a shared evaluation of what has been
accomplished is imperative.
After the evaluation, conclusions are made about what has been
learned and how the experiences and observations can be made use of in
the future. Aiming at such a “meta stage” develops the organizational
ability to deal with future processes. In this stage of the development
process, the first circle of experiential learning is completed. The next
cycle is started immediately after the previous one ends. At this stage, the
staff has already gained new experiences, new knowledge and skill, that
is to say, “the organization has learned”.
Agreeing on the individual responsibilities and the work schedule
for the process at the very beginning is important for the work that is
needed for a next target of development. The people who were handed
the next target of development to undertake a couple of months
previously have by now been able to do important subconscious mental
work on their theme. Their selective attention has been focused on the
target of development that they were actively involved in choosing. Due
to this, the participants have been able to pay attention to, perhaps, an
article, a book, a TV program, or a random discussion related to the topic
of their choice. The employee in charge of the target may collect an
article, jot down a note of what she heard or saw, and utilizes what she
read in her own work, etc. She is working on the subject matter, even
though the target of development might not be exactly actual at the
moment. Thus the group has already acquainted itself with the matter
better than the rest and will be ready to take over the responsibility of
leading the development process. However, the responsible group itself
will not do all the work needed for the project, but rather delegates and
shares smaller tasks so that the agreed target of development gets done in
due course.
