Cooperative leadership in action
I have discussed the philosophy of cooperative learning and leadership in
terms of the theory of experiential learning (Kohonen & Leppilampi
1994; Leppilampi & Piekkari 2001). It has been an important insight for
me as a cooperative educator to connect the models of cooperative
learning with the experiential learning theory (Leppilampi & Piekkari
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

8
2001). I will now try to examine how this theory, originally developed for
the teaching process, can also work in cooperative leadership.
According to the theory of experiential learning (Kolb 1984;
Kohonen 2001), an independent, intentional person is most committed to
the improvement of herself and her work when she is free to choose her
own development goals and decide on the means of pursuing them. Thus
a person is most motivated when she feels that she can have an influence
on all the stages of the process concerning her learning, from goal-setting
to planning, monitoring and carrying out the plans and to evaluating the
outcomes. A mature person is able to reflect on her own action critically
even amidst everyday work tasks and pressures. She understands the
significance of experience for learning. In her “meta-stage” of reflective
evaluation, she is able to look back over her past action, deriving learning
from her successes as well as mistakes. Genuine reflection is a very
demanding skill that requires constant practice. This poses an important
challenge for cooperative leadership and collegial development.
A cooperative leader guides her staff “walking alongside” with
each of them, asking catalytic, thought-provoking questions, showing a
genuine interest in the needs of her employees. A leader who is interested
in the learning of her staff is also a humble listener who dares to confess
her own weaknesses, to reveal where she is vulnerable, and above all her
willingness to learn from others. With such leadership, the staff also dares
to take risks and even fail without the fear of guilt. The organization is
defined by a culture of mutual support and growth, in which reflection,
supporting others and respect has become an everyday practice. Everyone
develops herself, tries out new things, and encourages and supports others
to try even when everything does not go as planned. The difference
between a well-functioning organization and a less good one, then, is not
so much in what is done, but rather in how it is done and how conflicts
are handled. The background thinking here is that development is
fostered by conflict resolution and reflection.
This line of thinking works for the growth of a small group as well
as for the entire staff. Nowadays it is commonly agreed that a permanent
change in the culture of a work community cannot be attained by rules
given from above. In such a case, the staff may work obediently for a
while, but in the course of time opposition will also spread fast. This
results in back talk and resistance of leadership, which is likely to lead to
a gradual breakdown of the organizational culture into small cliques that
may eventually end up competing for power against each other. In a
situation like this, the entire function of the organization is jeopardized.
The “iceberg model” of the visible and invisible parts of the organization
(French and Bell, 1975) describes how cooperative leadership can foster
the coherence of an organizational culture.
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

9
The visible tip of the iceberg, the “official” part, is often required for
creating the leadership’s long-term vision and goals, as well as the
functional structures and resources. A good leader has a clear picture of
the direction and the goals, but she also knows how to reach them
together with the staff. Refining and developing one’s own thinking while
at the same time listening to the staff is an important element of
cooperative leadership.
This kind of leadership does not, however, mean endless and time-
consuming discussions. A cooperative, strong leader knows when there
has been enough discussion and necessary information for decision-
making. When time is ripe for this, she firmly guides the group towards
the majority view, or in a tight situation, even against the popular
opinion. This kind of action is justified especially when the leader has
genuinely listened to the staff, but then has to make an independent
decision in a strong belief that it will be the best solution for the
organization. In a situation like this, the leader has to recognize that she
alone is responsible for the consequences of her decision.
The core message of the iceberg-model is that the hidden part in an
organizational process of change must also be taken into a serious
consideration. Change in the real culture of a work community is best
attained by involving the staff at all the stages of the process of change,
and by leading the process with skill. For instance, in a proper “footing
process” of a strategy, the staff has an active part in debating the
community’s values, norms, goals, procedures, rules, ways of solving
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

10
conflict situations, and so on. A good process relies on the innate know-
how and the “tacit knowledge” of the organization, and values highly the
available emotional intelligence as a part of successful development.
