Good meeting practises as an example of cooperative leadership
According to my observations and the discussions I have had in my
training, poorly planned conferences and meetings are the greatest loss of
time in any organization. Conferences do not begin punctually as some of
the participants are late to arrive to the conference room. Poorly planned
things take up everyone’s time, an enormous amount of time is used for
various announcements, only a few people speak, the discussion jumps
from one subject to another, people may talk on the mobile phone during
the meeting, they leave in the middle, the matters discussed do not
involve everyone present, ... the list could go on forever.
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

13
Creating a cooperative culture and structures begins with
cooperative meetings and conferences. A well-managed and smoothly
running meeting or a conference serves as a miniature model of
cooperative working for the whole organization. An efficient conference
is the basis of any well-functioning organization. In Diagram 3, a model
structure is given for a cooperative conference. It concentrates not so
much on the technical issues of a conference, but is rather aimed at
involving everyone in the meeting, genuinely and with keen interest.
In a cooperative conference, everyone has a real possibility to participate
in each stage of the meeting, including the preparation of each part. A
useful practise for encouraging the involved people to arrive to the
meeting room before the official beginning time is simply to offer them
coffee or other refreshments during the informal talks. Free chatter helps
them to detach from their present obligations and to orient themselves to
the meeting, which will start exactly at the agreed time.
The choice of location and seating plays an important role in a
cooperative conference; these choices will also convey the structure of
cooperative leadership. It is customary that meetings are generally held in
the same space time after time, and the same people may always sit on
the same seats. The renewal of such physical structures starts naturally by
taking this familiar practise openly under discussion. A meeting can start
with a shared discussion in pairs on “why do we sit here, in this set-up?”
After a few minutes’ talk, the leader randomly asks what points came up
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

14
in the pairs. After a shared discussion, a decision is made to try out a new
place for the next meeting and to consider the role of the location for the
success of the meeting.
The interaction becomes more effective when the chairs are placed
in the form of a circle and tables removed, especially in the case of
discussion-based meetings and brainstorming sessions. And after all, why
not have a meeting, especially small group planning sessions, for instance
outside, in the garden? In a situation like this, some of the pair
discussions can easily be done as a short stroll with a notebook to write
down the ideas. At the end it is important to consider the new working
methods together, reviewing the pros and cons of the experience.
Before going through the agenda, it is a good idea to check the
schedules of the participants and to agree on the time of closing the
meeting. By doing this, the leader can make sure that all the matters are
discussed without interruptions, with no one leaving the meeting place
before the end of the session. Besides, a time frame that is accepted
together will usually result in a more disciplined discussion and a better
resolution of all the points on the agenda. If some of the points cannot be
resolved on time, everyone is conscious that an additional meeting is
needed, or that the open issues will have to be moved to the agenda of the
next meeting. It is imperative to close the meeting at the time decided
together.
Defining and setting common goals is very important for
commitment. In a well-prepared meeting, the agenda has been given to
the participants well in time before the meeting. Including a suggestion
for the decision of a given point, as discussed by the preparatory group,
can be helpful especially in the case of difficult matters (see “planning
continuation” later). As a result, the corridor discussions, so familiar in
many organizations, are moved to the preceding days and everyone enters
the meeting better prepared. If the agenda is not provided in advance, it is
advisable to give the participants a few minutes for going through the
points on the agenda at the beginning of the meeting. After this the
chairperson can quickly ask the pairs for their opinion on how the points
should be prioritized in the meeting.
Experience has shown that it is a good practise to divide the points
on the agenda into three parts: announcements, points to be decided upon
and points to be discussed. The announcements can be done more quickly
by writing everything down on the agenda, and going through just the
most important and question-provoking ones together. The function of the
discussion points on the agenda is to be better prepared for the next
meeting and possibly to agree on the persons to do some advance work
on them in the meantime. In this context, cooperation is inherently
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

15
connected with the principle of equal participation whereby each member
of the group is in turn responsible for the preparatory work.
In developing the practises for cooperative meetings, it is advisable
to agree on a set of ground rules for a meeting. In my work, I have
frequently come across with complaints that some people do not
participate actively in a meeting. The fact that someone does not give an
opinion in a meeting does not mean that she would not have one. The
community is used to just a part of the participants discussing (usually the
leadership and some actives), while others remain silent most of the time.
Other frequent problems include, for instance, that the meeting does not
stick to the points on the agenda, gets tangled with one point for too long,
people do not listen to everyone’s opinion equally, or cannot make clear
decisions. Bringing such problems to daylight requires an open discussion
in which everyone’s experiences from the previous meetings are collected
in pairs. It is a good idea to have enough time for this. A list of
development issues for the meeting practises is created on the basis of
material gained. These issues are then improved together systematically.
Using small group discussions and pair work to go through the
most difficult matters on the agenda has proved to be extremely effective.
After the proposal for the decision, each group is given a couple of
minutes to agree on their opinion of the proposal, keeping in mind the
principle that “everyone is ready to report”. After this, for example, the
leader asks each group member to assume an alphabet, A, B or C. Then
the leader says that (for instance) member B of each group should prepare
to give the group’s opinion. In most cases, this makes sure that even the
opposing opinions get the voice. No one is forced to talk in their own
name, instead she can say “we were thinking with A and C here, that...”
This procedure ties everyone firmly to the process, as everyone has to be
able to explain the group’s opinion on the matter.
The principles of positive interdependence and individual
accountability become visible and tangible in cooperative work. Using
group talk, or functions like that, might take a bit longer than the
“ordinary” process, but in most cases it is well worth the extra time, by
way of getting the points discussed properly and agreed on definitively.
In the evaluation stage, assessments once again take place in the
pairs: how well did we meet the goals set? How did we succeed in
working together? How did we work by the agreed rules?, etc. This stage
will take about 5 minutes, but experience has shown that the time spent
here will come back later in time that is saved through more effective
meetings.
It is advisable to put the evaluation on the agenda, to make sure
that it gets done. The goal of the evaluation is to find ways of improving
future meeting practices, so the conclusions and agreements are written
www.leppilampi.com
asko@leppilampi.com

16
down with this goal in mind. The question of who will be the chairperson
and secretary in the future should also be discussed when considering
improvements for the meeting practises. A practice of rotating order,
changing the participants in these functions, has proved quite interesting.
This practice makes the official leader of the group free to observe the
participants’ action from a different perspective. Sometimes it is
advisable for the leadership not to take part in the discussion at all (or to
enter only when the decisions are to be made), concentrating instead on
observing the culture of decision making, the general atmosphere of the
meeting, and so on.
Planning the continuation has been, along with evaluation, the most
neglected part of the meetings. A general practice is that the schedule and
location of the next meeting are settled, but other issues are left on the
chairperson’s responsibility. A very effective way of improving meetings
is to have a discussion in the end on the points to be included on the
agenda for the next meeting. At the same time, it is easy to agree on the
participants in charge of preparing each point. This procedure involves
members of the groups more firmly in the agenda. It is also in the spirit of
cooperative leadership that everyone has a possibility to influence on the
points that she will prepare. It is a good practice to work by the principle
of equal participation and keeping a record on each member’s
contributions to the preparatory work.
The practice of good meetings discussed above is a firm step
towards a cooperative work place culture, be it in the context of
developing an organization or, let’s say, of political decision-making. In
many work places, the participants have made it a practice to display the
model in Diagram 3 on the wall or on the tables of the meeting room, to
remind everybody of the common principles of action. At the same time,
the leadership team has agreed that each of them will use the same model
consistently in all of the conferences and meetings they conduct. When
this practice is observed regularly for a year’s time or so, the mindset and
culture of a cooperative meeting will spread to all conferences, meetings
and discussions within the organization. Through this culture, the basis is
laid for even wider cooperation in the functions of the organization.
